--- Essay ---
\section{Introduction}
Mass emergencies and mass panic are often linked in our imagination, but "panic" is rarely well-defined. The Cambridge Dictionary defines it as “a sudden strong feeling of fear that prevents reasonable thought and action” \citep{CambridgeDef}. When addressed in research ‘panic’ is often described as  a disproportionate flight response \citep{Cocking2009}, irrational behaviour \citep{Wang2012, Cocking2009, CTIF2018} and anti-social actions focused on personal survival (Cocking2008, CTIF2018). It spreads like a contagion \citep{Wang2012, Cocking2008, CTIF2018, Latane1968} and it eradicates all previously existing social bonds \citep{Cocking2009}. In his essay “The Nature and Conditions of Panic”, \citet{Quarantelli1954} defines it as a brief, intense fear reaction with loss of self-control and non-social, irrational flight behaviour. 
This paper will explain why the belief of mass panic in an evacuation is a myth and aims to highlight the need for more extensive research into the influence of social interactions on group evacuations. A computer game is proposed to show the potential virtual simulation games hold in this field of study, by safely confronting individuals with emergency situations and still getting representative results of their evacuation behaviour. While this paper focuses on the evacuation behaviour of individuals, future extensions of the game could involve multiple players to study emergent crowd behaviour.

\section{Literature Review}
The belief that mass panic occurs inevitably or at least frequently during evacuations out of danger zones persists among public safety professionals \citep{Drury2013, AustralianJournal}, despite recent research suggesting that this may not be true.
Media reports often amplify this perception with flashy news headlines, often corroborated by witness reports on how other people acted during the event, but this can be misleading \citep{AustralianJournal}. For example, during a 2023 London Underground incident, where the passenger emergency alarm was activated after smoke and a smell of burning \citep{REPORT}, passengers self-evacuated by breaking windows, after there was “no communication from the driver, [or] the station staff” \citep{BBC} and failure of station staff to open the doors for more than four minutes \citep{REPORT}. This behaviour, while seemingly irrational, was a logical response to the perceived threat and lack of information. Many passengers helped each other, contradicting the idea that people act solely for personal survival in emergency situations. Additionally, an official investigation report identified insufficient training of the operational staff as the underlying factor of the incident \citep{REPORT}, not panic. Another argument that emergency situations do not lead to immediate panic is the fact that people often even dismiss simple fire alarms, and generally underestimate the threat level they are in, which can delay their response time and slow down evacuation \citep{AustralianJournal, Cocking2008, Drury2013}.

The ‘mass panic’ myth can negatively impact evacuation procedures, building design, and research. Believing in this myth may lead to the incorrect assumption that delaying the alarm and withholding information prevents mass panic and is therefore the best course of action in an emergency situation \citep{AustralianJournal, Cocking2009, Drury2013}, an example is the 2009 L’Aquila earthquake where several scientists were trialled for giving inaccurate information, which they did in part to avoid mass panic \citep{Hall2011}. However, studies show the more and clearer the information is, the more swiftly \citep{Proulx1991, Cocking2008}, rationally and calmly \citep{Proulx1991, AustralianJournal, Cocking2009} people react. Furthermore, enhanced communication and trained staff guiding evacuations reduces risk behaviours of people, like delayed responses and running \citep{Vanderwal2021}. The ‘panic model’ has also been influential in the planning, designing and engineering of public spaces and emergency plans. Fire codes are traditionally prescriptive, and inflexibly specify the precise minimum requirements for buildings based on occupancy size \citep{CTIF2018}, with the focus lying primarily on improving physical factors for an evacuation, like corridor width or door number. While this alone is no issue, this often comes at the expense of dismissing psychological factors \citep{Cocking2009}. These codes implicitly still reflect old, potentially false beliefs \citep{CTIF2018}. Even when computer models of crowd movements are used, they usually lack accurate psychological considerations \citep{Cocking2008}. In research, this panic myth persists \citep{Wang2012, Deng2022}, potentially negatively impacting the results of a study or leading to false conclusions. 

Several new theories have been proposed to explain human behaviour within groups and mass evacuations. First, the social attachment model of crowd behaviour argues that people move towards familiar places and people, such as family and friends, when in danger, and will always strive to evacuate within a familiar group as opposed to alone, unwilling to go faster than their slowest members \citep{Cocking2009, Cocking2008}. Other research is showing that individuals will usually try to evacuate through the same exits through which they entered, even if it is potentially more dangerous than the less familiar alternatives  \citep{CTIF2018, Cocking2008}. While the social attachment model does explain the tendency of people to behave altruistic towards people within their familiar group, it does not explain cooperative and altruistic behaviour between people without any previous attachments. However, it has been shown that people usually behave in a very social manner in mass evacuations, even towards complete strangers \citep{Cocking2009, Drury2013, CTIF2018}, while staying completely rational and logical in their decisions \citep{CTIF2018, AustralianJournal, SFPE2024}. Additionally, social bonds never truly collapse, and the emergency usually even fosters new bonds and a shared feeling of unity and togetherness \citep{Cocking2009, Cocking2008}.
The self-categorisation theory \citep{Cocking2009, Cocking2008} tries to address this by speculating that emergency situations can create a common identity amongst crowd members, and people categorise others as part of their collective self. As a consequence of this shared-identity people react to threats towards others as if they were threats towards themselves and act accordingly. \citet[pp.63]{Cocking2009} claims that “account would suggest that panic is a feature of individuals, and in most crowds, order will be the norm”. This constraint of panic to individuals, and the absence of general panic was already noted by \citet{Quarantelli1954}. \citet{Cocking2009} even concludes their research by stating that people are remarkably resilient not despite the crowd but precisely because of it. 

In settings where the participant was put next to completely passive people during a fake emergency situation, participants usually ignored the danger signs or took significantly longer to react appropriately \citep{Kinateder2016, Latane1968}. This experiment was repeated with a participant surrounded by proactive people, and the exact opposite was noted - the participant usually joined the proactive people in a much quicker evacuation \citep{Kinateder2016}.  People actively draw on social cues of others to infer the danger level and which action they should pursue \citep{Kinateder2016, Latane1968}. This does not seem to extend to the feeling of panic, as stated above this is constraint to individuals. The social influence of others can either be positive by encouraging evacuation or negative by delaying it, depending on their actions \citep{Kinateder2016, Latane1968}. It is debated whether this influence is due to the diffusion of responsibility, where individuals give up some responsibility for their own safety to the other group members, or whether a sense of togetherness reduces fear, causing people to follow the actions of the group \citep{Latane1968}. Alternatively, the presence of others may enforce social constraints, leading individuals to rationalise their actions or inactions to align with those around them, lest they be seen as an outsider \citep{Latane1968}. This at once positive and negative side of social influence was also observed by \citet{Cuesta2021}, who noted that larger groups were more efficient in evacuating than individuals,  while this in turn also limited the escape alternative as people followed the decisions of the group \citep{Cuesta2021}. However, in a different study made with Virtual reality (VR) it was found that people’s exit choices were heavily influenced by not only the size of the crowd but also the proportion of people using it \citep{Kinateder2021}. When the whole crowd used an exit, then so would the participants, but when only a fraction of them used it, the participant would often even avoid the exit used by the majority, opting to go through the other exit alone due to potential congestion \citep{Kinateder2021}. This all highlights the complexities in this research field and how more has to be done to account for the effect of group dynamics in evacuations. A thorough understanding of each agent’s individual behaviour and how exactly it changes through social interactions is needed to accurately observe the emergent crowd behaviour \citep{Ibrahim2019}.


\section{Methods}
I propose a 2.5D, third person fire evacuation simulation game, to study and better understand how individuals react in emergency situations. In the game, players start on the second floor of an office building and must evacuate within four minutes to avoid their character dying. The player can interact with various objects, some of which may aid in the escape such as ringing the fire alarm, collecting a water hose or calling 112. The game primarily shows whether individuals tend to react more rationally or not by scoring all their actions, except walking and running, according to a ‘rationality score’. An informal survey was done after the participants completed the game. The expectation is that the participants will overall act rationally and therefore get a significantly positive average rationality score. Additionally, the survey should show that the participants agree with the rationality score and feel like they would have acted similarly in a real life setting.
Since exposing participants to actual danger situations is not possible, this study examines evacuation behaviour through a computer game which is designed to analyse how an individual reacts in an emergency situation. This project describes the results of the baseline with a single player. Future extension of the game could involve multiple players who interact while having to evacuate the building, as well as be in first person to improve immersion. Another way to extend the concept could be to implement the game in VR, for maximal immersion while still staying safe. VR has been shown to be relatively ecologically valid and previous studies have used it in analysing people’s fire evacuation behaviours \citep{Deng2022}. This also extends to researching social influence during evacuation behaviours. \citep{Kinateder2016} conducted a validation study to compare the results of an experiment conducted once in VR and once in real-life, concluding that the results show similar response patterns. It has been found to be a very promising tool for researchers to analyse people’s behaviours in fire evacuation settings \citep{Kinateder2014}, and designs have been made to make VR experiments meet research requirements for evacuation studies \citep{VRev}.
Lastly, a more formal and extensive survey after the game could be included to analyse the results better, perhaps in an overall similar setup as \citet{Wang2016} used in their investigation study. 

The proposed game was coded with Unity3D, a popular game engine, and coded completely in C\#, a general-purpose high-level programming language. The same game engine was successfully used by previous studies, for example by \citet{Ribeiro2012} to evaluate the potential of serious games to train evacuation behaviour. 
It is a third person game as opposed to first person or a virtual reality game, mainly due to constraints of skill, timing and budget. The fire starts right next to the player, which reduces the uncertainty that usually exists in real life fire evacuations, however, it also increases the perceived danger level the player experiences and therefore heightens immersion. Additionally, a lot of uncertainty is added by the fact that the participant has been given no time to explore the space before the game really starts. The fire itself spreads according to the flood fill algorithm, with the added constraint that it cannot pass through any walls. This creates a more realistic and environment-based spread to the fire, without overstepping current coding skills.
The floor design was mainly supposed to imitate a small office building, including many items one would usually find in an office. Some steps were taken to prevent easy escape of the player, and make the design of the game purposefully feel more disorienting. This is intended to increase frustration and artificially heighten the perceived danger within the game, making the players interact with the game more and increase immersion, which in contrast to first person gameplay or VR, is comparatively weak. This included not adding fire escapes or evacuation route plans, limiting the number of fire safety alarms and equipment per floor, as well as separating the staircases which led to the lower floor, so that no staircase led directly from the second to the ground floor. The appendix B provides sketches of the two floors. The inclusion of a visible timer, the constant sound of the fire, and the spreading fire visual itself are supposed to heighten this effect. 

Most actions the player could take had a ‘rationality score’ attached to them, unbeknownst to the participant so that it would not bias their first play-through. Specific actions with a positive rationality score were chosen based on three evacuation procedures \citep{1, 2, 3}. However, some actions were deliberately not included (e.g., following the floorplan, following exit signs), for the same reason as listed above.
The score magnitudes were chosen so that overall irrational behaviour had more weight than the rational actions (a cumulative score of -26 for irrational actions, and a +18 for the sum of all rational actions). This reflects that a wider array of irrational actions exist in real life, while rational action is more constrained by the current situation. While it is quite easy to engage in various irrational and random actions in a given situation, rational action requires more thought and consideration, to achieve a specific outcome. The scores themselves were decided on in relation to each other, the magnitude of the scores themselves was arbitrary. Positive scores were given a certain magnitude depending on how important they were deemed by the previously mentioned evacuation procedures (e.g. activating the fire alarm had the highest score of +5). Subsequently, actions which were a direct contradiction of positive actions, were given an appropriately low score (e.g. not activating the fire alarm had a score of -5). Other scores changed their value according to time, reflecting how actions usually deemed as inappropriate can become appropriate if the situation becomes more dire, here simplified with the player getting more stressed due to “time running out”. For example, breaking a window is deemed as irrational with a score of -1, unless the timer is below two minutes, then the score changes to +1. Jumping out of the window is only rational if the player is already on the first floor (where chances of survival are deemed to be higher),  and irrational when done from the second floor. However, it can become less irrational (from -5 to -1) if the timer is below three minutes. The logic here is that if the player is still not on the first floor by that point, the fire will have spread significantly and jumping from the window still indicates the rational choice of preferring the uncertain chances of survival through jumping than the certain death of staying in the building. The rationality scores of all actions can be found in the appendix C. 
Whether the player survives the game or not is not the primary focus of this project and therefore does not play any role in the final rationality score. The rationality of the overall decision process of the evacuation is being analysed, which is reflected by how the rationality scores function. Choosing not to weigh the death or survival of the player into the final rationality score might seem illogical, but an action can be completely logical for the person within the situation, with limited knowledge and time constraints, even if the outcome is an undesirable one.

Broadly speaking five script-categories exist, namely those relating to the character movements and animations, interactable objects and their interface, some game visuals like the timer, the fire, the scene changes and the audio management. The scripts relating to the interactables mainly deal with implementing the consequences of an action: adding the right amount to the rationality score, and potentially play sound effects or change the visuals within the game. 
The player can walk and run in all directions, but cannot jump. They can interact with all interactable objects visualised with an interface, by either pressing ‘E’ or ‘R’. The players can also scream by pressing the spacebar. The timer continuously counts down starting at four minutes, and its colour indicates whether the player dies after the countdown is finished or survives (red for death, green for survival). Certain actions like ‘call 112’ or ‘activate fire alarm’ can turn the timer green, while others can turn it red.
For the fire there are a total of four scripts, one managing the layout of where the fire appears (based on a grid system) and the second lets the fire spread according to the flood fill algorithm. The third script implements the consequences of colliding with the fire, namely the loss of time, the timer turning red and subtracting points from the rationality score. The fourth script is just a helper script. More information about the scripts can be found in the appendix D.
All assets used in the game were taken from the unity asset store (https://assetstore.unity.com/) and were open source. 

\section{Results}
Overall eight people played the game, and everyone completed it alone and apart from each other. The participant size was very small due to timing issues. One participant was disqualified because their level of expertise with games was too low, impacting their gameplay and score, while another one was disqualified, because they stated in the informal survey that they did not take the game very seriously. The third was disqualified because they had already seen me play the game beforehand during development, ensuring they knew more about the layout of the building and about the scoring. The scores of the remaining five participants are shown below with some of their abbreviated answers to the informal survey. Everyone reported that they were invested in the game. As can be seen three out of five had positive rationality scores and claimed that they played similarly as they would react in real life. The remaining two who had negative scores ended the game by jumping out of the window on the second floor within the first two minutes. Both then reported they probably would not have jumped out of the window while on the second floor in real life. Overall, the average rationality score over these five participants was 1,6. Everyone had fire evacuation training in school, with three of the five participants having gone to the same school. No one had any additional fire evacuation training. Everyone reported that the rationality score more or less represented how they acted within the game. The participants with the highest scores reported they were focused on getting to the exit as fast as possible, and did the least amount of exploring. If they came across a fire alarm or anything similarly helpful they did use it, but they did not actively look for anything besides the exit. The two with the negative scores reported they wanted to “get out as quickly as possible” leading them to jump out of the window. The last person with a score of +2 initially lost some time due to trying to stop the fire, before evacuating.


\section{Discussion}
As can be seen from Figure \ref{results} all remaining players  believed that the rationality score seems to reflect how they acted within the game, namely if the overall acted more rationally or irrationally. This seems to validate the chosen score values and how they interact with each other to produce the final rationality score. Additionally, all participants who said the rationality score reflected their real life actions had positive scores. Only the two participants with negative scores disagreed. This highlights a limitation of the game: reading that you are on the second floor of a building is not the same as actually seeing it.
Even though every participant got told that they were located on the second floor of the building, some still decided to jump even though they would not have done so in real life. In other words, they did not accredit the jump out of the window with the same danger-level as it would have in real life. This could be improved upon in a first person game setup or VR, where one can “see” out a window and more accurately judge the perceived danger. 
While the average score of all players was still positive, it was lower than expected. One reason could be that no participant got any additional fire evacuation training besides the fire drills in school, meaning they haven’t had any additional training since at least two to three years. This could explain the behaviour three from five participants showed of breaking the window as soon as they came across one, even though this would increase oxygen flow and feed a real life fire. Another reason for the lower average score could be due to the nature of the game. Being so removed from normal bodily actions (e.g. “walking” by pressing a key, instead of using the legs), no participant checked whether they could close the doors behind them after opening. While one participant stated that they completely forgot that one should do that in a fire emergency, the other four claimed they did not even know that that had been possible within the game. Again, this could have possibly been mended in a VR game setup. 

The purposefully confusing and unrealistic design of the game might have had the adverse effect of breaking the immersion for some participants. This was especially true for the three people with lower gaming skills, one of which even got disqualified because of this. The other person had a score of +2, but stated after the game that they had been very “confused, stressed and panicked”. While this contradicts my hypothesis that people generally do not panic in an emergency situation, the participant still claimed that the score was representative of their actions, meaning they believe they overall acted more rationally. The third person was disqualified due to other reasons, however they still reported significant struggles due to the unfamiliarity of the controls. This is validated by other research using serious games, where people with lower gaming skills showed lowered performance \citep{Ribeiro2012}. 
This increased frustration and could have affected how immersed some players were, leading to less serious gameplay. However, the participants who played the game were told previously to take it seriously, and through direct confirmation this concern does not seem to apply. If the game were to be expanded and more participants were to play the game, this possibility would have to be addressed though, either by simplifying the game similarly to \citet{Bode2014} or \citet{Kinateder2016}, only including people who are well-versed in gaming or include a training phase to make sure all participants have a minimum skill level. This training phase could be presented as a brief roaming period to get people acquainted with the setting and controls. This would have the additional benefit of making the game have a higher ecological validity, as people do not just get thrown into a building, and get a baseline to compare results better to, as done by \citet{Deng2022}, in their VR study on panic during fire evacuations. Finally, the fire could be simulated to spread more realistically, to heighten the ecological validity of the experiment and smoke visuals could provide a more realistic look and responses which currently can not be replicated (e.g. how the player will react to the warning effect of smoke coming through the door). 

Overall the findings may support the hypothesis that computer simulation games can be used to study an individual’s evacuation behaviour, as well as agree with previous research that shows that people tend to act in a rational manner while in an emergency situation, unfortunately the sample size is too small to accurately assess this. However, serious Games have shown to be very useful in training evacuation behaviour and personal skills in emergency situations before \citep{Ribeiro2012, Sacfung2014, Silva2013}. This shows that participants will engage with the game seriously and react in a manner which translates to the real world, which is also reflected in the answers of the participants of this project. Although a first-person game has shown more promising results than a third-person as used here citep{Silva2013}, this could not be done due to skill limitations in coding. Previous studies have used interactive virtual environments to study how individuals act and decide in evacuation scenarios, and how these combine to an overall crowd behaviour. \citet{Bode2014} used a 2D, top-down setup to analyse how participants chose between different exit routes while being influenced by directional information, including a simulated crowd. \citet{Rüppel2011} designed a game simulation to analyse the human behaviour in a fire evacuation, and suggested that the decisions of the participant in the game should be comparable to the real world, and holds value as a tool to study human behaviour in extreme situations \citep{Rüppel2011, Schatz2014}.

If the game were to be expanded to VR or first-person, I would expect the results to be clearer and people to overall act even more rationally. Many of the previously mentioned limitations of the game, which possibly had a negative impact on the results, may have been mended and overcome with a VR setup. In other words, I would expect a positive rationality score for all participants. If the game were to be expanded into a multiplayer game, I would expect people to cooperate and help each other find the exit. Interesting would be to see which strategies people adopt in varying group sizes in comparison to the individual strategies shown in this game, and how, if at all, the allocations of roles are handled (e.g. leader, follower, observer, etc.). Overall, no mass panic should occur, especially if the game stays in third player, due to the inherent limitations in immersion. 

\section{Conclusion}
This paper proposed a small 2.5D, third person fire evacuation simulation game, to better understand how individuals react in emergency situations. I believe this game design makes sense given the reviewed research, within the limitations of its creation. It showed the sought-after results that people act logically in emergency situations and therefore proved the potential video games hold for this kind of research, as even a game as amateurish as this replicated previous results. People do not panic in the sense of acting irrationally and antisocially. They usually have explanations for their actions, which when thought through make complete logical sense. This game tried to showcase just that, and seemed to succeed in doing so. Finally, some potential expansions to the game were discussed and how, if at all, the hypothesis would change as a consequence.
